AI #1929: Add supported features and appendix content for commitment program eligibility details (#2025)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/supported_features/commitment_eligibility.md

# Commitment Eligibility

## Description

> FOCUS supports the identification of charges that are eligible for commitment programs. The [*CommitmentEligibilityDetails*](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails) column captures which commitment programs a charge qualifies for, regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) is currently applied. This enables practitioners to calculate eligibility-adjusted commitment coverage rates, identify uncovered savings opportunities, and compare commitment options across providers.

Reviewer: As I mentioned in #1882: as the lay reader, I don't know what "commitment program" means.  Could you add a glossary entry for this, either in this PR, or in #1882?

Author: Addressed. PR #1882 now defines `commitment program` in the glossary. This PR links to it on first occurrence per section: line 5 (Description), line 11 (Naming Conventions), line 53 (Example SQL Queries preamble), line 57 (Query 1), line 112 (Query 3). Subsequent occurrences use italic only.

> FOCUS supports the identification of charges that are eligible for commitment programs. The [*CommitmentEligibilityDetails*](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails) column captures which commitment programs a charge qualifies for, regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) is currently applied. This enables practitioners to calculate eligibility-adjusted commitment coverage rates, identify uncovered savings opportunities, and compare commitment options across providers.

Reviewer: Which dataset are you talking about?  As a spec contributor, I know it's Cost and Usage, but as the lay reader, I don't. Going forward, to support our multi-dataset reality, we have to explicitly reference the dataset alongside the column.

Author: Addressed. Opening paragraph (line 5) now explicitly references "the Cost and Usage dataset."

| AWS         | CapacityReservation, ZonalReservation                                     | CapacityReservationTypes key                               |

## Directly Dependent Columns

* CommitmentEligibilityDetails

## Supporting Columns

* BilledCost
* ChargeCategory
* ChargePeriodEnd
* ChargePeriodStart
* CommitmentDiscountId
* CommitmentDiscountStatus
* CommitmentDiscountType
* EffectiveCost
* ServiceCategory
* ServiceName
* ServiceProviderName

## Example SQL Queries

The FOCUS specification implements commitment eligibility via the [*CommitmentEligibilityDetails*](#datasets.costandusage.commitmenteligibilitydetails) column, which is defined in [*JSON object format*](#attributes.jsonobjectformat).

Because ANSI SQL does not inherently support the parsing of JSON, the following queries leverage the JSON functions and utility functions (e.g., SAFE_DIVIDE) found in BigQuery Standard SQL in order to demonstrate this feature's functionality. Similar functions are available in all major SQL engines; thus, the below examples can be slightly modified to accommodate any particular database instance.

> Note: The queries below target the `CommitmentDiscountTypes` key. To include capacity-reservation programs, apply the same JSON extraction pattern to the `CapacityReservationTypes` key. Providers using only custom (`x_`-prefixed) keys would require modified JSON paths.

Reviewer 2: Maybe clarify that just swapping the JSON extraction pattern isn't enough?
```suggestion
Note: The queries below target the `CommitmentDiscountTypes` key. To analyze capacity-reservation programs, use the corresponding `CapacityReservationTypes` key and evaluate covered versus uncovered usage using `CapacityReservationId`. Providers using only custom (`x_`-prefixed) keys would require modified JSON paths.
```

Author: Thanks for flagging the clarity gap. The underlying structure has changed since your suggestion: PR #1882 collapsed `CommitmentDiscountTypes` and `CapacityReservationTypes` into a single `CommitmentPrograms` array. The note (line 53) is now rewritten to reflect this: all program types live in the same array, and filtering by category means filtering on specific `ProgramType` values. Your point about `x_`-prefixed keys is preserved on line 53.

Author: Connected with @narlaadbe over Slack and he confirmed he was fine with me resolving this comment thread based on the recent changes.

Note: When a charge is eligible for multiple commitment types, it appears once per eligible type. Costs are not deduplicated across types, since each type represents an independent purchasing opportunity.

```sql
SELECT
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  CU.ServiceName,
  JSON_VALUE(CDT, '$.Type') AS EligibleCommitmentType,
  SUM(CU.BilledCost) AS TotalEligibleUncoveredCost
FROM focus_data_table CU
CROSS JOIN
  UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(CU.CommitmentEligibilityDetails, '$.CommitmentDiscountTypes')) AS CDT
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
  AND CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL
GROUP BY
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  CU.ServiceName,
  JSON_VALUE(CDT, '$.Type')
ORDER BY TotalEligibleUncoveredCost DESC
```

> ### Calculate Commitment Coverage Rate with Eligibility-Adjusted Denominator

Reviewer: Feels like the examples in PR #1882 should be augmented to include a Coverage calculation.  We are unlocking an important KPI, so concrete examples will be critical.  I added [this similar comment](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1882/files#r2937132479) there.

@Matt-Cowsert could you partner with @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware to implement this on that PR (or optionally, doing it in this PR)?

Author: Agreed this is important. Coordinating with @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware on coverage calculation examples. Targeting #1882 as the primary location since the examples belong alongside the column definition. Will cross-reference from this supported feature once finalized.

Author: @shawnalpay I've added the examples to #1882, one for Commitment Program Eligibility coverage rate and one for uncovered eligible spend by Commitment Program, program type.

Reviewer: @Matt-Cowsert So am I right in understanding that you won't be making a change here in #2025?  If so, you can resolve this comment, and I can direct my feedback to #1882.

Author: I'm going to resolve this as we aligned on where the concrete example needs to live and it's there in #1882.

# Commitment Eligibility

## Description

> FOCUS supports the identification of [*charges*](#glossary:charge) in the Cost and Usage dataset that are eligible for [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program). The [CommitmentProgramEligibility](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility) column captures which *commitment programs* a charge qualifies for, regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) is currently applied. This enables practitioners to calculate eligibility-adjusted commitment coverage rates, identify uncovered savings opportunities, and compare commitment options across providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FOCUS supports the identification of [*charges*](#glossary:charge) in the [Cost and Usage](#datasets.costandusage) dataset that are eligible for [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program). The [CommitmentProgramEligibility](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility) column captures which *commitment programs* a charge qualifies for, regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) is currently applied. This enables practitioners to calculate eligibility-adjusted commitment coverage rates, identify uncovered savings opportunities, and compare commitment options across providers.
```

Illustrative examples of ProgramType values by provider:

| Provider     | Example ProgramType Values                                   | Context                                                    |
|:-------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------|
| Aura Web     | FlexibleSpendPlan, ResourceReservation                       | Consistent with CommitmentDiscountType                     |
| CrestNode    | FlexibleSpendPlan, ResourceReservation                       | Consistent with CommitmentDiscountType                     |
| LatticeScale | ResourceReservation, FlexibleSpendPlan                       | Granular per commitment program                            |
| StackLens    | MonthlyPlatformCommitment, AnnualPlatformCommitment           | Provider terminology; CommitmentDiscountType not populated  |
| OmniQuery    | CapacityCreditPool                                           | Provider terminology                                       |
| Aura Web     | AdvanceCapacityReservation, ZonalCapacityReservation          | Capacity-reservation programs                              |

> 

Reviewer: I don't think you need any of this.  If you DO want to keep it, then I think you need some preamble like, "here are some fictitious data generators supporting commitment programs, along with some example values".

```suggestion

```

* CommitmentDiscountType
* EffectiveCost
* ServiceCategory
* ServiceName
* ServiceProviderName

## Example SQL Queries

The FOCUS specification implements commitment eligibility via the [CommitmentProgramEligibility](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility) column, which is defined in [*JSON object format*](#attributes.jsonobjectformat).

Because ANSI SQL does not inherently support the parsing of JSON, the following queries leverage the JSON functions and utility functions (e.g., SAFE_DIVIDE) found in BigQuery Standard SQL in order to demonstrate this feature's functionality. Similar functions are available in all major SQL engines; thus, the below examples can be slightly modified to accommodate any particular database instance.

Note: The queries below extract from the `CommitmentPrograms` array, which contains all [*commitment program*](#glossary:commitment-program) types (both discount-bearing and capacity-reservation). To target a specific category, filter on ProgramType values. Providers using only custom (`x_`-prefixed) top-level keys would require modified JSON paths.

### Identify Eligible Uncovered Spend by Program Type (CSP Example)

> This query identifies [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that are eligible for [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) but are not currently covered by a [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount). A practitioner running Aura Web workloads can use this to quantify the savings opportunity per *commitment program* type (e.g., FlexibleSpendPlan vs. ResourceReservation) and per [*service*](#glossary:service).

Reviewer: We always want to ground the reader by mentioning what Aura Web is (e.g., "Consider Aura Web, a cloud service provider").  That said, I don't think you need to mention the fictitious data generator here at all; it's not used in the queries and doesn't help the reader understand the queries.

Here's a way you could tweak it.  Maybe there's a better way, but because you're not talking about hard numbers here in the supported feature, I think you can jettison the name.

```suggestion
This query identifies [*charges*](#glossary:charge) that are eligible for [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program) but are not currently covered by a [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount). A practitioner running relevant workloads can use this to quantify the savings opportunity per *commitment program* type (e.g., FlexibleSpendPlan vs. ResourceReservation) and per [*service*](#glossary:service).
```

> The query filters to "Usage" charges where CommitmentProgramEligibility is populated (the charge is eligible) and CommitmentDiscountId is null (no *commitment* is applied). It then expands the CommitmentPrograms array to aggregate eligible spend per ProgramType. This query uses BilledCost rather than EffectiveCost because the charges are uncovered (CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL), so BilledCost reflects the actual amount paid and the savings opportunity.

Reviewer: ### Text vs. Code Mismatch in Query 1

In the description for the first query ("Identify Eligible Uncovered Spend by Program Type"), the text states:
> "The query filters to 'Usage' charges where CommitmentProgramEligibility is populated..."

However, looking at the `WHERE` clause in the provided SQL:
```sql
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
  AND CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL
```

There is no explicit filter for `CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL`. While the query *does* successfully filter out nulls implicitly—because `CROSS JOIN UNNEST` drops rows with empty or null arrays in BigQuery—this discrepancy between the prose and the code can be confusing for practitioners trying to learn the logic. 

**Recommendation:** Either update the prose to explain that the `CROSS JOIN` handles the filtering, or (for better readability and cross-dialect translation) explicitly add `AND CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL` to the `WHERE` clause so the code exactly matches the explanation.

Author: Good catch. Added explicit `AND CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL` to the WHERE clause (commit bcf9930). Went with your first recommendation: keeps the prose-code alignment tight and avoids relying on dialect-specific UNNEST behavior.

Applied the same explicit filter to Query 3 for consistency, since it uses the same CROSS JOIN UNNEST pattern.

```sql
SELECT
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  SUM(CASE
    WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
    THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END) AS CoveredCost,
  SUM(CASE
    WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
      OR CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
    THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END) AS TotalEligibleCost,
  SAFE_DIVIDE(
    SUM(CASE
      WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
      THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END),
    SUM(CASE
      WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
        OR CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
      THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END)
  ) AS CommitmentCoverageRate
FROM focus_data_table CU
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
GROUP BY CU.ServiceProviderName
```

### Compare Commitment Opportunities Across Providers (Cross-Provider with SaaS)

> This query aggregates eligible spend and uncovered eligible spend across all providers, including SaaS platforms. A practitioner managing both CSP and SaaS workloads (e.g., Aura Web alongside OmniQuery or StackLens) can identify where uncovered eligible spend is concentrated across [*commitment program*](#glossary:commitment-program) types.

Reviewer: In Query 1, you included an excellent warning note explaining that because `CROSS JOIN UNNEST` flattens the array, a charge eligible for multiple program types will appear multiple times (meaning costs are not deduplicated across types). 

Since Query 3 uses the exact same unnesting logic, there is a risk that a practitioner might run it, decide to remove the `EligibleProgramType` grouping to get a single "Grand Total" of eligible spend across all providers, and accidentally double-count their spend. 

**Recommendation:** It would be great to copy that deduplication warning from Query 1 and add it to the explanatory notes for Query 3, just to make sure practitioners don't inadvertently inflate their numbers.

Author: Added a dedup warning note to Query 3 (commit bcf9930). Kept it brief with a back-reference to Query 1 since both live in the same file and the reader will have already seen the full explanation.

Note: When a charge is eligible for multiple *commitment program* types, it appears once per eligible type. Costs are not deduplicated across types, since each type represents an independent purchasing opportunity.

```sql
SELECT
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  CU.ServiceName,
  JSON_VALUE(CP, '$.ProgramType') AS EligibleProgramType,
  SUM(CU.BilledCost) AS TotalEligibleUncoveredCost
FROM focus_data_table CU
CROSS JOIN
  UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility, '$.CommitmentPrograms')) AS CP
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
  AND CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL

>   AND CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL

Reviewer 3: The description text states:
> A practitioner running relevant workloads can use this to quantify the savings opportunity per *commitment program* type

However, the query does not filter out capacity-reservation program types, which do not provide savings/discounts.

**Minimal fix:** Add NOT IN filter:

```suggestion
  AND CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
  AND JSON_VALUE(CP, '$.ProgramType') NOT IN ('AdvanceResourceCommitment', 'ZonalResourceCommitment')
```

**This change:**
- Excludes known capacity-reservation program types (via NOT IN). Could alternatively use IN with known discount-bearing types (e.g., `IN ('FlexibleSpendPlan', 'ResourceReservation')`). Ideally, the specification would provide a way to distinguish discount-bearing vs capacity-reservation program types without hardcoding values.

**General observation:** 
- It would also be beneficial to have a way to filter to commitment discounts only (excluding negotiated discounts). Currently, `CommitmentProgramEligibility` may include discount-bearing programs that are tracked via `ContractApplied` rather than `CommitmentDiscountId`, making it difficult to isolate commitment discount savings opportunities specifically.

Author: Applied in commit 0ab0e94. Added the IN filter for consistency with Queries 2 and 3. Kept the query flat (no CTE) since there is no repeated logic that benefits from the restructuring.

> # Commitment Program Eligibility

Reviewer 3: There are several workarounds and notes for non-conformant provider behavior:

>   - `This safeguards against providers that omit the eligibility JSON on already-covered rows`
>   - `Note: Some SaaS providers may not populate CommitmentDiscountId even when a *commitment* is applied.`
>   - `Whether CommitmentProgramEligibility must be populated on "Unused" rows is not explicitly addressed in the column requirements.`

However, the specification is clear:

**Dataset requirements (dataset.md):**
- CostAndUsage MUST include `CommitmentDiscountId` when the service provider supports *commitment discounts*
- CostAndUsage MUST include `CommitmentDiscountType` when the service provider supports *commitment discounts*
- CostAndUsage MUST include `CommitmentDiscountStatus` when the service provider supports *commitment discounts*
- CostAndUsage MUST include `CapacityReservationId` when the service provider supports *capacity reservations*
- CostAndUsage MUST include `CapacityReservationStatus` when the service provider supports *capacity reservations*

**Column nullability requirements:**
- `CommitmentDiscountId`: "MUST NOT be null when a charge is related to a commitment discount"
- `CommitmentDiscountType`: "MUST NOT be null when CommitmentDiscountId is not null"
- `CommitmentDiscountStatus`: "MUST NOT be null when CommitmentDiscountId is not null and ChargeCategory is 'Usage'"
- `CapacityReservationId`: "MUST NOT be null when a charge represents the unused portion of a capacity reservation"
- `CapacityReservationStatus`: "MUST NOT be null when CapacityReservationId is not null and ChargeCategory is 'Usage'"
- `CommitmentProgramEligibility`: "MUST NOT be null when a charge is eligible for a commitment program, **regardless of whether a commitment was actually applied to the charge**"

Supported features documentation should assume conformant data rather than include workarounds for non-conformant providers.

**Suggestion:** Add a single note at the top of the "Example SQL Queries" section:

> Note: The following queries assume FOCUS-conformant dataset artifacts. Practitioners should verify provider conformance before relying on these queries. Non-conformant dataset artifacts may produce inaccurate results.

Then simplify the queries by removing the workarounds and non-conformance notes.

Author: Applied in commit 0ab0e94. Added a conformance note at the top of the SQL section. Removed the OR-condition rationale from Query 2 and the SaaS non-conformance note from Query 3. Kept the Query 4 CapacityReservationId note but reframed it: the spec uses SHOULD (not MUST) for populating CapacityReservationId on used rows, so this documents a spec-level distinction rather than provider non-conformance.

## Description

FOCUS supports the identification of [*charges*](#glossary:charge) in the [Cost and Usage](#datasets.costandusage) dataset that are eligible for [*commitment programs*](#glossary:commitment-program). The [CommitmentProgramEligibility](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility) column captures which *commitment programs* a charge qualifies for, regardless of whether a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) is currently applied. This enables practitioners to calculate eligibility-adjusted commitment coverage rates, identify uncovered savings opportunities, and compare commitment options across providers.

> CommitmentProgramEligibility contains a JSON object with a FOCUS-defined top-level key `CommitmentPrograms` containing an array of objects. Each object has a `ProgramType` property identifying the specific *commitment program*. Both discount-bearing programs (e.g., Flexible Spend Plans, Resource Reservations) and capacity-reservation programs (e.g., Advance Resource Commitments) are included in the same array, distinguished by their ProgramType value. Providers may include additional custom keys (prefixed with `x_`) for other commitment categories. Per the [column requirements](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility), providers should also include negotiated *commitment programs* for which usage is eligible. For more information, see the definition of Commitment Program Eligibility [here](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
CommitmentProgramEligibility contains a JSON object with a FOCUS-defined top-level key `CommitmentPrograms` containing an array of objects. Each object has a `ProgramType` property identifying the specific *commitment program*. Both discount-bearing programs (e.g., Flexible Spend Plans, Resource Reservations) and capacity-reservation programs (e.g., Advance Resource Commitments) are included in the same array, distinguished by their ProgramType value. Providers may include additional custom keys (prefixed with x_) to pass through extra metadata or provider-specific attributes related to the eligibility. Per the [column requirements](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility), providers should also include negotiated *commitment programs* for which usage is eligible. For more information, see the definition of Commitment Program Eligibility [here](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility).
```

Reviewer 4: A quick tweak needed here regarding the x_ custom keys! The draft currently states that providers can use these keys 'for other commitment categories, almost like a pass htrough for metadata so that we don't break anything in the process. This is my understanding of it, at least. 

Let's broaden this sentence so we don't accidentally limit how practitioners and providers understand the extensibility of this column.

> CommitmentProgramEligibility contains a JSON object with a FOCUS-defined top-level key `CommitmentPrograms` containing an array of objects. Each object has a `ProgramType` property identifying the specific *commitment program*. Both discount-bearing programs (e.g., Flexible Spend Plans, Resource Reservations) and capacity-reservation programs (e.g., Advance Resource Commitments) are included in the same array, distinguished by their ProgramType value. Providers may include additional custom keys (prefixed with `x_`) for other commitment categories. Per the [column requirements](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility), providers should also include negotiated *commitment programs* for which usage is eligible. For more information, see the definition of Commitment Program Eligibility [here](#datasets.costandusage.commitmentprogrameligibility).

Reviewer 4: I'm asking to learn - do we have guidelines on when we point to the `ProagamType` vs just the word ProgramType? I tried to guess a pattern by reading this page but couldn't. Since you know the rules better, could we double check that we've consistently applied that logic?

Author: The rule: backticks when referring to the JSON property name (e.g., "the `ProgramType` property", "aggregate per `ProgramType`"), plain text when referring to the general concept (e.g., "per commitment program type"). Checked all occurrences and the current usage is consistent with this pattern. The heading on line 9 ("Naming Conventions for ProgramType Values") omits backticks per standard heading formatting.

Reviewer 4: Awesome thank you!

  SUM(CU.BilledCost) AS TotalEligibleUncoveredCost
FROM focus_data_table CU
CROSS JOIN
  UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility, '$.CommitmentPrograms')) AS CP
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
  AND CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL
  AND CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  CU.ServiceName,
  JSON_VALUE(CP, '$.ProgramType')
ORDER BY TotalEligibleUncoveredCost DESC
```

### Calculate Commitment Discount Coverage Rate with Eligibility-Adjusted Denominator

This query computes a [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) coverage rate using only eligible [*charges*](#glossary:charge) as the denominator. Without eligibility data, practitioners typically divide covered spend by total spend, which produces a coverage rate that includes ineligible charges (e.g., storage services, support fees) in the denominator and may not reflect the actionable coverage opportunity. This query targets discount-bearing programs only; for [*capacity reservation*](#glossary:capacity-reservation) utilization, see the capacity reservation query below.

> The denominator uses an OR condition: a charge is counted as eligible if it is already covered (CommitmentDiscountId is not null) or if it is flagged as eligible (CommitmentProgramEligibility is not null). This safeguards against providers that omit the eligibility JSON on already-covered rows, which would otherwise exclude covered spend from the denominator and produce a 0% rate.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The denominator uses an OR condition: a charge is counted as eligible if it is already covered (CommitmentDiscountId is not null) or if it is flagged as eligible (CommitmentProgramEligibility is not null). While the specification mandates that CommitmentProgramEligibility must be populated on eligible covered rows, this safeguards against non-compliant provider data where the JSON is omitted. Without this OR condition, such omissions would exclude covered spend from the denominator and produce an artificially low or 0% rate.
```

Reviewer 4: Thanks for putting this example together in the spec. 

However, I relaized that we need to adjust the explanation of why the provider omits the data. The draft currently says, 'This is permitted by the spec since the column is conditional.' It is my understanding that when we say a 'Conditional' feature level that doesn't mean a provider can selectively omit the data on a row-by-row basis. It just means they aren't forced to support the column at all. But if they do provide the column, they are bound by the normative rules.

Since the spec explicitly states CommitmentProgramEligibility MUST NOT be null when a charge is eligible, a provider omitting it on a covered row is actually generating non-compliant data, rather than using a permitted loophole.

Let's keep the example but tweak the text

Reviewer 4: Let's bring this up in the next TF-3 meeting to see what the group thinks too.

> Note: Unused commitment rows (CommitmentDiscountStatus = "Unused") have CommitmentDiscountId populated and are included in both the numerator and denominator. Practitioners seeking a utilization-adjusted rate should additionally filter on CommitmentDiscountStatus = "Used". Whether CommitmentProgramEligibility must be populated on "Unused" rows is not explicitly addressed in the column requirements.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note: Unused commitment rows (CommitmentDiscountStatus = "Unused") have CommitmentDiscountId populated and will artificially inflate both the numerator and the denominator if left in the dataset. To calculate a true, utilization-adjusted coverage rate, practitioners should additionally filter out these rows (e.g., AND CU.CommitmentDiscountStatus != 'Unused').
```

Reviewer 4: To get a true utilization-adjusted rate, the practitioner absolutely must filter out Unused rows, otherwise the idle commitments will artificially inflate both the numerator and denominator. 
I'm not a huge fan of saying we don't address it in the requirement. We're bringing this up in TF-3 anyway - if this needs to be address, let's address it, if not then maybe this suggestion will work

Author: I couldn't commit suggestion via UI, and I missed this when I was accepting other suggestions. However, I pushed a new commit and gave you co-authorship @SanjnaSrivatsaVMware . Resolving this thread (as that's what would happen if I'd simply accepted the suggestion in the UI).

```sql
SELECT
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  SUM(CASE
    WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
    THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END) AS CoveredCost,
  SUM(CASE
    WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
      OR CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
    THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END) AS TotalEligibleCost,
  SAFE_DIVIDE(
    SUM(CASE
      WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
      THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END),
    SUM(CASE
      WHEN CU.CommitmentDiscountId IS NOT NULL
        OR CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
      THEN CU.EffectiveCost ELSE 0 END)
  ) AS CommitmentCoverageRate
FROM focus_data_table CU
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
GROUP BY CU.ServiceProviderName
```

### Compare Commitment Opportunities Across Providers (Cross-Provider with SaaS)

This query aggregates eligible spend and uncovered eligible spend across all providers, including SaaS platforms. A practitioner managing both CSP and SaaS workloads can identify where uncovered eligible spend is concentrated across [*commitment program*](#glossary:commitment-program) types.

> Note: Some SaaS providers may not populate CommitmentDiscountId even when a [*commitment*](#glossary:commitment) is applied. For those providers, EffectiveCost may not reflect *commitment* pricing, and this query captures total eligible spend rather than distinguishing covered from uncovered. Practitioners should consult provider-specific documentation to determine actual *commitment* utilization.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note: Some SaaS providers may not populate CommitmentDiscountId even when a commitment is applied. For those providers, this query will falsely categorize all eligible spend as "Uncovered," resulting in an artificially high Uncovered Rate. Practitioners should consult provider-specific documentation to determine how commitment utilization is actually surfaced in the data.
```

Reviewer 4: We might need to tweak the wording in this note so it accurately reflects what the SQL query is doing.

The note currently says that this query 'captures total eligible spend rather than distinguishing covered from uncovered.' But in the SELECT statement, the query does distinguish them by calculating an UncoveredEligibleCost and an UncoveredRate based on CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL.

If a provider doesn't populate that ID, the query will falsely dump all covered spend into the 'Uncovered' bucket, showing a 100% Uncovered Rate. Let's update the note to accurately warn practitioners about this false positive risk

Acme Corp runs compute workloads on Aura Web and holds an Advance Resource Commitment (cr-arc-acme-001) for a single charge period (2025-04-01). The ProgramType values "AdvanceResourceCommitment" and "ZonalResourceCommitment" are illustrative and do not correspond to a specific provider's program names.

This example focuses on Usage rows, which are the rows that the capacity reservation query above filters on. Purchase rows for the reservation itself are not shown.

Four usage rows for the period:

1. **Used capacity** (Row 1): Compute usage consuming the reservation. [CapacityReservationStatus](#datasets.costandusage.capacityreservationstatus) is "Used". [BilledCost](#datasets.costandusage.billedcost) and [EffectiveCost](#datasets.costandusage.effectivecost) are both &dollar;180.00.

> 2. **Unused capacity** (Row 2): Reserved capacity that went idle. CapacityReservationStatus is "Unused". BilledCost and EffectiveCost are both &dollar;70.00. Unlike [*commitment discount*](#glossary:commitment-discount) unused rows (where BilledCost is &dollar;0.00 because the purchase is invoiced separately), capacity reservation rows reflect the cost of reserved capacity whether consumed or not.

Reviewer 4: Do we have an opinion on how we'd guide a user that is trying to uncover purchase opportunities? 

If a provider populates Commitment Program Eligibily on an "Unused" row because the underlying resource type is technically eligible, users querying for "uncovered eligible spend" must remember to explicitly filter out Unused statuses across multiple columns (CommitmentDiscountStatus and CapacityReservationStatus). If they rely on simpler logic (like CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL), they will inadvertently sum up idle commitments as part of their future purchasing opportunity, artificially inflating the size of the opportunity.

Reviewer 4: Note: I made a suggestion for the queries and how it addresses it

Author: This was part of the broader cleanup in commit 0ab0e94, informed by your feedback and Irena's "assume conformance" direction. The workaround language that would have obscured this edge case has been removed, and Query 1 now clearly filters on `CommitmentDiscountId IS NULL` (excluding unused rows by definition). The unused-row warning on Query 2 was tightened per your suggestion in commit f3e0f62 to make the inflation risk explicit and actionable.

Reviewer 4: Sounds good. I will close this comment out

Note: The FOCUS specification requires CapacityReservationId to not be null when a charge represents unused capacity (MUST), but only recommends (SHOULD) populating it when a charge is related to a used [*capacity reservation*](#glossary:capacity-reservation). Where a provider does not populate CapacityReservationId on used rows, this query will show those rows with a null CapacityReservationStatus.

```sql
SELECT
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  CU.ServiceName,
  JSON_VALUE(CP, '$.ProgramType') AS EligibleProgramType,
  CU.CapacityReservationStatus,
  SUM(CU.BilledCost) AS TotalCost,
  COUNT(*) AS RowCount
FROM focus_data_table CU
CROSS JOIN
  UNNEST(JSON_EXTRACT_ARRAY(CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility, '$.CommitmentPrograms')) AS CP
WHERE CU.ChargePeriodStart >= ? AND CU.ChargePeriodEnd < ?
  AND CU.ChargeCategory = 'Usage'
  AND CU.CommitmentProgramEligibility IS NOT NULL
  AND JSON_VALUE(CP, '$.ProgramType') IN ('AdvanceResourceCommitment', 'ZonalResourceCommitment')
GROUP BY
  CU.ServiceProviderName,
  CU.ServiceName,
  JSON_VALUE(CP, '$.ProgramType'),
  CU.CapacityReservationStatus
ORDER BY TotalCost DESC
```

> ### Capacity Reservation Eligible Spend

Reviewer: This doesn't follow our pattern for supported features.  I'm in support of examples, but they belong in the appendix.  Ultimately, once I perform the refactor of this content per AI #2117, it will slot into the JSON Object Format examples.  For now, put any examples in the column definition, or in a separate appendix entry, to solidify the content, and I can sort out where it belongs during consistency review.

Author: Moved the capacity reservation example to a standalone appendix entry (commit 58c7966). New file: `specification/appendix/commitment_program_eligibility_examples.md`, registered in `appendix.mdpp` and `appendix_overview.md`.

We can sort out the final home during the consistency review per #2117.

Reviewer: Agreed.  Resolving.
